README.md, before:

<p align="center">
	<img alt="skott" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43391199/188307540-00740a8b-ad19-401b-b767-6211bfb0d26b.png" width="350">
</p>


![version](https://img.shields.io/badge/dynamic/json.svg?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/antoine-coulon/skott/main/packages/skott/package.json&query=$.version&label=Version)
[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/dt/skott.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/skott)
[![Maintenance](https://img.shields.io/badge/Maintained%3F-yes-green.svg)](https://github.com/antoine-coulon/skott/commit-activity)


**skott** is a minimalist developer tool that can be used to efficiently generate directed graphs from your **JavaScript/TypeScript/Node.js** project. It can **automatically collect metadata** such as _file size_, _third-party_ or _builtin dependencies_, **detect circular dependencies** or help you **building tools relying on graph data structures** thanks to the exposed primitives. Many display modes exists (such as **embedded interactive web application** shown just below) but also other from the CLI **(.svg, .png, .md, .json)**.

<p align="center">
	<img alt="skott" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43391199/204465791-99ae71bb-67e9-4c84-8734-c9cad0b5c24d.png">
</p>

**skott** exposes **directed graphs primitives** so that it can be used to implement tools on top of graph structures e.g. affected/incremental patterns as it exposes a way to know precisely and deeply dependencies for each graph node. More generally speaking, anything that can be implemented using graphs can be implemented using **skott**.

✅ Works for modern **JavaScript/TypeScript** projects (TSX/JSX, ECMAScript and CommonJS modules all supported). **TypeScript**'s path aliases are also supported.

✅ Works with any custom **dependency resolver** (useful for specific monorepos integration)

✅ File tree traversal supports Git ignored files (via `.gitignore` files)

✅ Runs **incrementally** (experimental), meaning that Skott will _only analyze_ files that were modified/added since the last run, offering performance boosts.

✅ Deeply detects **circular dependencies** in an efficient way, with the ability to provide a max depth for the search

✅ Detect **unused npm third-party dependencies**

✅ Deeply **collect all dependencies of the project graph**

✅ Deep **parent and child dependencies traversals**

✅ Metadata collection for each traversed node (file size, view dependencies towards Node.js builtin modules and npm third-party libraries)

✅ Node.js binary and JSON modules are excluded by default

✅ Generate static files including raw JSON, [mermaid-js](https://github.com/mermaid-js/mermaid) diagrams (.svg, .png, .md) representing your project's graph directly generated from the CLI.


> **Note**
>
> **skott** can either build the project graph using an entrypoint file or build it starting from the current root directory and recursively traverse all directories/folders. Currently, supported files are **.js, .jsx, .cjs, .mjs, .ts, .tsx**. In addition to `.gitignore`-d files, some directories will be ignored by default, please check [the code](https://github.com/antoine-coulon/skott/blob/56fd0b3347ba5113be8d70bc07d09a4065e0b124/packages/skott/src/modules/walkers/ecmascript/module-resolver.ts#L93) to see more about that. 

## Why you should use skott or an equivalent project

The whole purpose of Skott is to build a graph from your project source code and offer many features relying on that generated graph.

Overall, a generated project graph in software engineering acts as a **powerful tool that enhances code comprehension, project management, code maintenance and refactoring, and collaboration**. It provides a holistic view of the project's structure, dependencies, and relationships, enabling developers to make informed decisions and streamline their development process.

Moreover, Skott aims to provide a comprehensive visual representation of the project's structure, dependencies, and relationships between different components. This visual overview **allows developers to better understand the overall architecture and organization of the codebase, making it easier to navigate and identify potential areas of improvement or optimization**. 

In the essence the main goal of Skott is to **help developers understand the codebase's structure and to enable more effective refactoring, reducing code duplication, getting rid of circular dependencies and improving overall code quality**.

## Why you should care about circular dependencies and dead code

1. **Circular (also known as cyclic) dependencies**

Let's start with an example of a simple circular dependency between three graph nodes:
> In the context of **skott**, nodes represent JavaScript files.

```mermaid  
  graph LR
    src/fileA.js --> src/fileB.js
    src/fileB.js --> src/fileC.js
    src/fileC.js --> src/fileA.js
```

**What is the problem with cycles?**

Circular dependencies can make your program crash or introduce inconsistencies while modules are being loaded. [Node.js module systems](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html) try to resolve circular dependencies using different approaches which are more or less successful. For example, [CommonJS](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#modules-commonjs-modules) can (due to its dynamic nature of resolving imports) [introduce inconsistencies when building the project graph](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#cycles).

If you're using [ECMAScript modules](https://nodejs.org/api/esm.html), you can consider yourself safe about module resolution inconsistencies mentioned above, mostly thanks to its static nature.

Nevertheless, cyclic dependencies at the file-level are sometimes choices but more often [code smells](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_smell) revealing design misconceptions, so be sure to double check that.

2. **Dead code**

_Dead code_ can be defined as a code literally having no impact on the application, meaning that removing dead code should not alter in any way the behavior of the system. Some module bundlers such as [Rollup](https://rollupjs.org) and [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org) allow to delete some of the dead code [leveraging tree shaking](https://webpack.js.org/guides/tree-shaking). 

However, tree shaking is not an easy task and can mostly work with module systems using static-based imports/exports such as ECMAScript modules. To avoid removing code that appears to be used at runtime, module bundlers are being very precise about determining automatically chunks of code that can be safely removed. Module bundlers can also be helped by providing them manually clues about what can be safely removed e.g. `/*#__PURE__*/` for Webpack.

If you're not using tools implementing tree shaking, you will be able soon to use **skott**, which will bring up soon unused imports/exports warnings 🚀  

## Documentation

Please refer to the [documentation at the skott package level](https://github.com/antoine-coulon/skott/tree/main/packages/skott#readme)

## Graph Management

**skott** is powered by [digraph-js](https://github.com/antoine-coulon/digraph-js), a _0 dependency_ Node.js library to make Directed Graph construction and traversal effortless.

## Parsers

While traversing the project, **skott** automatically loads the appropriate parser required. When meeting **".js, .cjs, .mjs, .jsx"** files, a specific JS parser will be used, otherwise for **".ts, .tsx"** files
a specific TS parser will be used instead.

- JavaScript: JavaScript/JSX parsing is done using [meriyah](https://github.com/meriyah/meriyah)
- TypeScript: TypeScript/TSX parsing is done using [typescript-estree](https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/tree/main/packages/typescript-estree)

Commit message:

feat: collect workspace information + improve skott's API configuration (#52)
* feat: collect workspace information when using bulk analysis

* refactor: extract manifest parser

* test: introduce unit and integration tests that run in different contexts

* refactor: clean the conditions associated with the reading or not of a file

* fix: add root directory to each file of the non gitignored list

* refactor: generalize the fs mount and cleanup

* test: add gitignored files check with real fs

* refactor: scope all unit tests in unit folder

* feat: enable devDependencies unused tracking

* docs: mention limitations around unused devDeps

* feat: handle illegal config states from the API

* chore: add changeset

* docs: fix previous changelog

* feat: allow skott api invokation without any config

* docs: add little section about getWorkspace

* fix: unify cli/api error messages

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
	<img alt="skott" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43391199/188307540-00740a8b-ad19-401b-b767-6211bfb0d26b.png" width="350">
</p>


![version](https://img.shields.io/badge/dynamic/json.svg?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/antoine-coulon/skott/main/packages/skott/package.json&query=$.version&label=Version)
[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/dt/skott.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/skott)
[![Maintenance](https://img.shields.io/badge/Maintained%3F-yes-green.svg)](https://github.com/antoine-coulon/skott/commit-activity)


**skott** is a minimalist developer tool that can be used to efficiently generate directed graphs from your **JavaScript/TypeScript/Node.js** project. It can **automatically collect metadata** such as _file size_, _third-party_ or _builtin dependencies_, **detect circular dependencies** or help you **building tools relying on graph data structures** thanks to the exposed primitives. Many display modes exists (such as **embedded interactive web application** shown just below) but also other from the CLI **(.svg, .png, .md, .json)**.

<p align="center">
	<img alt="skott" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43391199/204465791-99ae71bb-67e9-4c84-8734-c9cad0b5c24d.png">
</p>

**skott** exposes **directed graphs primitives** so that it can be used to implement tools on top of graph structures e.g. affected/incremental patterns as it exposes a way to know precisely and deeply dependencies for each graph node. More generally speaking, anything that can be implemented using graphs can be implemented using **skott**.

✅ Works for modern **JavaScript/TypeScript** projects (TSX/JSX, ECMAScript and CommonJS modules all supported). **TypeScript**'s path aliases are also supported.

✅ Works with any custom **dependency resolver** (useful for specific monorepos integration)

✅ File tree traversal supports Git ignored files (via `.gitignore` files)

✅ Runs **incrementally** (experimental), meaning that Skott will _only analyze_ files that were modified/added since the last run, offering performance boosts.

✅ Deeply detects **circular dependencies** in an efficient way, with the ability to provide a max depth for the search

✅ Detect **unused npm third-party dependencies**. Note that all unused `devDependencies` are not guaranteed to be detected as `depcheck` [only provides analysis for set of supported libraries](https://github.com/depcheck/depcheck) (eslint, karma, mocha, etc).

✅ Deeply **collect all dependencies of the project graph**

✅ Deep **parent and child dependencies traversals**

✅ Metadata collection for each traversed node (file size, view dependencies towards Node.js builtin modules and npm third-party libraries)

✅ Node.js binary and JSON modules are excluded by default

✅ Generate static files including raw JSON, [mermaid-js](https://github.com/mermaid-js/mermaid) diagrams (.svg, .png, .md) representing your project's graph directly generated from the CLI.


> **Note**
>
> **skott** can either build the project graph using an entrypoint file or build it starting from the current root directory and recursively traverse all directories/folders. Currently, supported files are **.js, .jsx, .cjs, .mjs, .ts, .tsx**. In addition to `.gitignore`-d files, some directories will be ignored by default, please check [the code](https://github.com/antoine-coulon/skott/blob/56fd0b3347ba5113be8d70bc07d09a4065e0b124/packages/skott/src/modules/walkers/ecmascript/module-resolver.ts#L93) to see more about that. 

## Why you should use skott or an equivalent project

The whole purpose of Skott is to build a graph from your project source code and offer many features relying on that generated graph.

Overall, a generated project graph in software engineering acts as a **powerful tool that enhances code comprehension, project management, code maintenance and refactoring, and collaboration**. It provides a holistic view of the project's structure, dependencies, and relationships, enabling developers to make informed decisions and streamline their development process.

Moreover, Skott aims to provide a comprehensive visual representation of the project's structure, dependencies, and relationships between different components. This visual overview **allows developers to better understand the overall architecture and organization of the codebase, making it easier to navigate and identify potential areas of improvement or optimization**. 

In the essence the main goal of Skott is to **help developers understand the codebase's structure and to enable more effective refactoring, reducing code duplication, getting rid of circular dependencies and improving overall code quality**.

## Why you should care about circular dependencies and dead code

1. **Circular (also known as cyclic) dependencies**

Let's start with an example of a simple circular dependency between three graph nodes:
> In the context of **skott**, nodes represent JavaScript files.

```mermaid  
  graph LR
    src/fileA.js --> src/fileB.js
    src/fileB.js --> src/fileC.js
    src/fileC.js --> src/fileA.js
```

**What is the problem with cycles?**

Circular dependencies can make your program crash or introduce inconsistencies while modules are being loaded. [Node.js module systems](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html) try to resolve circular dependencies using different approaches which are more or less successful. For example, [CommonJS](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#modules-commonjs-modules) can (due to its dynamic nature of resolving imports) [introduce inconsistencies when building the project graph](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#cycles).

If you're using [ECMAScript modules](https://nodejs.org/api/esm.html), you can consider yourself safe about module resolution inconsistencies mentioned above, mostly thanks to its static nature.

Nevertheless, cyclic dependencies at the file-level are sometimes choices but more often [code smells](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_smell) revealing design misconceptions, so be sure to double check that.

2. **Dead code**

_Dead code_ can be defined as a code literally having no impact on the application, meaning that removing dead code should not alter in any way the behavior of the system. Some module bundlers such as [Rollup](https://rollupjs.org) and [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org) allow to delete some of the dead code [leveraging tree shaking](https://webpack.js.org/guides/tree-shaking). 

However, tree shaking is not an easy task and can mostly work with module systems using static-based imports/exports such as ECMAScript modules. To avoid removing code that appears to be used at runtime, module bundlers are being very precise about determining automatically chunks of code that can be safely removed. Module bundlers can also be helped by providing them manually clues about what can be safely removed e.g. `/*#__PURE__*/` for Webpack.

If you're not using tools implementing tree shaking, you will be able soon to use **skott**, which will bring up soon unused imports/exports warnings 🚀  

## Documentation

Please refer to the [documentation at the skott package level](https://github.com/antoine-coulon/skott/tree/main/packages/skott#readme)

## Graph Management

**skott** is powered by [digraph-js](https://github.com/antoine-coulon/digraph-js), a _0 dependency_ Node.js library to make Directed Graph construction and traversal effortless.

## Parsers

While traversing the project, **skott** automatically loads the appropriate parser required. When meeting **".js, .cjs, .mjs, .jsx"** files, a specific JS parser will be used, otherwise for **".ts, .tsx"** files
a specific TS parser will be used instead.

- JavaScript: JavaScript/JSX parsing is done using [meriyah](https://github.com/meriyah/meriyah)
- TypeScript: TypeScript/TSX parsing is done using [typescript-estree](https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/tree/main/packages/typescript-estree)
